For free distribution 1
01
Law and Justice
Defining law
Law can be defined as a system of rules used for controlling formal human
behaviour and human activities in a community or in a country. Different thinkers
have defined law in different ways.
Definitions given by T. H. Green and John Austin are given below.
Law is a system of rights and obligations enforced by the state . T.H. Green
The law is the command of the sovereign and violating it is a punishable
offence. John Austin
Every society should be ruled according to a specific law. It is the responsibility
of the citizens of a country to respect and obey the law. Justice, peace and social
security are secured in a society where the rule of law exists. The prime aim of the
law is to control human behaviour by which justice is ensured so that life, rights and
property of the people are safeguarded.
Justice is an other concept related to law. Justice can be defined as a fair
behaviour or fair treatment. Justice is meted out through impartial enforcement of
law after listening to all the parties well.
2 For free distribution
Dispensing the law should be done in fairness and equality to all. If the law is
properly exercised in a country the society becomes law abiding. People develop a
positive attitude towards the law and trust it. It contributes to create a just and fair
society.
Following factors are very important to create justice.
² Right of an individual to know about allegations made against him
² Right of an individual to be heard, in person or by an Attorney-at-Law, at a
fair trial by a competent court.
² The right to get a fair and an impartial trial
Characteristics of law
All are equal before law and all have the right to get the protection of law.
Some of the highly civilized societies, where advanced legal systems prevail, have
the following characteristics.
² Laws are made only by the state based on its authoritative power
² They are made with the intention of controlling human behaviour and
actions
² Laws should be fair and just
² Laws should be enacted aiming at achieving the wellbeing of the common
society
² Laws should adjust in conformity with the changing needs of the society
² Laws should be clear and definite
² Contravention of law is a punishable offence
For free distribution 3
Sources of law
Factors that contribute to the derivation of law or the means of getting
information about law can be defined as sources of law. Some of these sources are
as follows.
1. Constitution - It is the supreme law of a country
2. Different statutes- They are enactments passed by the parliament and
they can also be taken as the sources of law
3. Judgements - Decrees, orders, pronouncements or judgements
delivered by competent Courts of Law which are
followed by the other courts of law subsequently.
This is known as Case law.
4. Views and principles expressed by legal authorities or eminent scholars of
 law are recognized as scientific principles of law.
5. Customs - Well established customs accepted by the society
 are known as Customary laws
6. Religion - Laws have been made on the basis of different
religions. E.g. Muslim law and Vehera and Devalagam
law.
Types of laws
According to the way that laws are exercised, they are classified as domestic
and international law.
Domestic laws
Domestic laws are operative and effective within the territory of a country.
They can differ from country to country. They are enacted in order to meet the
needs of the country. Domestic laws can be classified into two types as Civil law
and Criminal law. They are described in the diagram given below.
4 For free distribution
Differences between criminal law and civil law are as follows.
Criminal Law Civil Law
² When a person damages the
life or the property of another
person, criminal law is applied to
determine the case.
² Criminal law does not have
different branches but it is
classified as crimes of severe
nature and minor offences.
² Special punishments are imposed
or inflicted by the Courts on persons convicted of such crimes
and offences.
E.g.- confiscation of property by the
state, capital punishment, imprisonment.
² Criminal Procedure of 1979
and the Penal Code of 1833 are
important statutes that deal with
crimes.
² In criminal law, the priority
is given to punishments and
rehabilitation.
² In criminal law the complaint
or indictment is prepared by the
police or Department of Attorney
General.
² Civil law resolves or deals with
disputes among individuals.
² Civil law has different branches.
E.g. - Law of contract business law,
family law
² Paying compensation to the
affected parties on civil offences
committed on them.
² Civil procedure code is important
with regard to civil law.
² Civil law gives priority to recover
damage or restoration of damage
from the parties at fault.
² In a civil case application for
relief from court is sought by
individual parties concerned.
For free distribution 5
Criminal law covers and includes prevention of crimes, taking action against
offences concerning anti social activities, activities that affect or threaten peace in
the public such as murder, torture, injuring, sexual harassments and crimes, rape,
damaging common property, stealing property, looting, keeping stolen items and
keeping drugs and more over selling them.
Diagram 1.1 Classification of Domestic Law
Criminal law Civil law
The law preventing
anti-social activities done
by an individual or a
group of individuals.
Eg - Murder, Plunders, rape,
thefts, drug trafficking and
child abuse.
Domestic Law
Constitutional
Law
The supreme law of
exercising the powers of
the state.
Eg - Constitution.
The law dealing with
personal relations of the
people.
Eg - Contracts, marital
affairs, interstate property
transmission, rights,
banking and business,
as well as the problems
related to commercial
affairs and lands.
International Law
'Starke' defines international law as the law that controls inter-state
relationships, relationship between states and international organizations and the
individuals. Currently there are many branches of law that have emerged from
international law.
Eg - International human rights law, environmental law, law of entrepreneurship,
oceanic law. International Court of Justice and International Criminal Court to
dispense with international law.
The Legal systems of Sri Lanka
Roman-Dutch law is the Common law of Sri Lanka. In addition to that
there are a few other special laws in Sri Lanka.
6 For free distribution
(01). Kandyan law
Kandyan law was in operation during the time of ancient Kandyan
Kingdom. During the period of British rule, this law was restricted only to the
Sinhalese living in Kandyan territories. Today, this law controls marriage, divorce,
heirship etc. Kandyan Sinhalese are free to contract marriages under the General
Law of the country.
(02). Thesawalamai law
The term Thesawalamai means the custom of the land. This law had
its origin in the customs of the Tamils resided in Northern province. All those
customs were codified into a law in 1706.
(03) Muslim Law
Muslim law is applicable to anyone who follows Islam. Al-Quran,
Al-Hadees, Sunnahs, Ijma and Kiyas are the documents that are considered as
sources of Islamic law. Mohamadan Code made in 1806 is currently operative in
Sri Lanka.
Eg- Muslim marriages and divorce, estate rights, adoptation, maintenance etc are
governed by this law. Quazi courts were set up in 1929 for the first time to close
cases according to Muslim law.
The responsibility of a state is to establish a good society in the country
while preserving and maintaining law and order. It is essential to work according
to indigenous laws when the law is in conflict with the other laws of the country. It
is also important to bring dignity to the country when dealing with other countries
under the international law.
Activity 1.1
² What do you mean by the term “Law”?
² Explain as to why a country needs law.
² Describe the special laws in Sri Lanka briefly.
For free distribution 7
Judicial system in Sri Lanka
Evolution of judicial system in Sri Lanka
The judicial system in Sri Lanka has had its origin in the monarchical era.
The king was the highest and the supreme judicial officer while judiciary was
functioning under an unwritten system of law. The final appeal on any judgement
was also made to him.
Fig. 1.1 Kandy Magul Maduwa the royal court
Portuguese continued to apply the ancient Sinhala judicial system in Sri
Lanka during their rule. Judicial powers were exercised by Korale, Disave and
Vidane while village council system or gam sabha was also continued. During the
period of the Dutch there were three judicial districts namely Colombo, Jaffna and
Galle. They employed a systematic judicial system.
The judicial system was made much more systematic during the period of
British colonial rule. Accordingly, the Roman –Dutch law introduced by the Dutch
was also applied further by the British judicial system. During that period, one
could appeal to the privy council of England against a decision given by an apex
court in Sri Lanka. Constitutional reforms in 1972 abolished that power. According
8 For free distribution
to the Law of Dispensing Justice introduced in 1973, the Supreme Court of Sri
Lanka was made as the apex court while the Court Of Appeal, High Court, District
Court, Magistrate Court and the Primary Courts remained as other courts of the
judicial system of Sri Lanka.
Activity 1.2
² Study the special changes brought about to the judicial system in
post-independence period of Sri Lanka.
Present judicial system of Sri Lanka
Judicial system established under Judicature Act and by the Constitution of
1978 is illustrated in the diagram given below.
Supreme court
Court of appeal
Provincial high court
High court
District court
Magistrate court
Diagram 1.2 - Present judicial system of Sri Lanka
In addition to the judicial system mentioned above, some other institutions
and tribunals administering judicial functions have been set up through special Acts
of Parliament. Accordingly, labour tribunals have been established to settle labour
disputes, while Quazi courts have been set up for resolving marriage and divorce
For free distribution 9
issues of Muslims. More over Rent Control Board has been established to resolve
problems related to house rentals. In addition to this, Conciliation Board has been
established to resolve the disputes without going to court.
Now, let us study the main judicial institutions briefly.
Suprme Court
Supreme Court is the highest and final superior court of record and is
empowered to exercise its powers, subject to the provisions of the Constitution.
The Court has final and conclusive civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction on
appeals from the Court of Appeal or any Court of first Instance. It is headed by the
Chief Justice. Powers of the Supreme Court which comprises of the Chief Justice
and other Judges are shown in the diagram 1.3.
Jurisdicti on of the
Supreme Court
Jurisdiction in
respect of powers
to hear petitions on
fundamental rights
Consultative
jurisdiction
Jurisdiction in
respect of petitions
on referendums
Jurisdiction in election
Petitions
(presidential election)
Final appellate
Jurisdiction
Jurisdiction on
making Supreme
Court rules
Jurisdiction in
respect of privileges
of the parliament
Diagram 1.3 - Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
Jurisdiction in respect
of constitutional
matters
10 For free distribution
Fig. 1.2 - Supreme court
Court of Appeal
Next to the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal is the highest and final
superior court of record. It is headed by the president of the Court of Appeal. Judges
are appointed to the Court of Appeal by the president under the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council. Jurisdication of the Court of appeal are as follows.
Jurisdiction
of Court of appeal
Appeals from the high court in the
exercise of its appelate or original
jurisdiction
Jurisdiction to try election petitions in
respect of the election of the members
of parliament
Power of Investigating and inspecting
the records of the courts of first
instance
Jurisdiction to grant and issue writs
of certiorori prohibition, procedendo,
mandamus, Quo warranto and habeas
corpus and to grant injunctions
Diagram 1.4 Jurisdiction of Court of Appeal
For free distribution 11
Provincial High Court
 The Provincial high courts were established under 13th Amendment of 1978
constitution. Judges are appointed to this court by the chief justice. The purpose of
establishing this court is to decentralize the powers of court of appeal to provincial
level. It provides an opportunity for the public to present their appeals at provincial
level. The powers of this court are as follows.
Diagram 1.5 Jurisdiction of Provincial High Courts
Jurisdiction
of Provincial
High Court
Commercial jurisdiction
Appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in
respect of convictions, Sentences, orders
entered or imposed by District Courts,
Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts within the province.
Writ jurisdiction in respect of powers
exercised under any law or under any statutes
made by the provincial council.
Appeals from Labour Tribunals, Agrarian
Tribunals and Small Claims courts.
Issuing writs of Habeas corpus in
provincial councils.
High court
The High Court of Sri Lanka established under the Constitution, has power
and the authority to hear, try and determine all prosecutions on indictment. It has
criminal and admiralty jurisdiction and also jurisdiction with regard to offences
committed aboard aircraft and within the territorial air space. The High Court is
the only Court which exercises the jurisdiction of the Court of First Instance and
the appellate jurisdiction. It exercises the civil jurisdiction as well as the criminal
jurisdiction.
Commercial High Court is empowered to hear cases involving commercial
transactions worth of which exceeds three million rupees and jurisdiction over the
cases falling under the Intellectual Property Act. Those powers are as follows.
12 For free distribution
Original Criminal
Jurisdiction
Applications
for the return of
or access to an
abducted child
(exercised by
the High Court
of the Western
Province)
Offences
committed aboard
aircraft and within
the territorial air
space
Jurisdiction
to hear and
determine an
offence i.e.
influencing or
attempting to
influence any
decision or order
made by the
Judicial Service
Commission or
influencing any
member thereof
² Murder cases
² Attempt to
murder
² Rapes
² Treasons
² Large scale
plunders
Admiralty
Jurisdiction
An offence
committed by
a Sri Lankan
abroad
Diagram 1.6 Jurisdiction of High Court
Jurisdiction of High Court
District Courts
District Courts have been established in 54 judicial districts in Sri Lanka. These
courts have all civil jurisdictions relevant to each district. The appointment and
removal of district court judges are carried out by the Judicial Service Commission.
Cases heard by District Courts are as follows.
1. Cases related to marriages. (divorce, marriage ,asking compensations for
sexual misconduct and divorce allowances etc)
2. Testamentary Cases - (cases related to the property of people, died without
leaving a last will i.e. intestate estate of deceased persons)
3. Guardianship of idiots and persons of unsound mind and guardianship of
their property Cases related to guardianship and legality of the under aged
children.
4. Cases related to guardianship and legality of the under aged children.
5. Demands for adoption of children.
6. Requests for changing the names in birth certificate.
7. Cases related to incomes.
For free distribution 13
8. Cases on trusts and bankruptcy.
9. Cases on payments, debts, damages demands for and financial cases.
10. Partition cases.
11. Cases on lands.
12. Cases on house rents.
13. Cases on compensation for accidents and insurance.
14. Cases filed under company act.
Magistrate's Court
Magistrate's Courts are established for 74 judicial divisions in Sri Lanka.
Every Magistrate's Court is vested with original criminal jurisdiction, and is
ordinarily empowered to impose sentences up to a fine of Rs. 1,500 and/or 2 years
rigorous or simple imprisonment.
All Magistrates are appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.
Appeals from convictions, sentences or orders of Magistrate's Courts within
a Province lie to the High Court of the Province.
² Offences on public security.
² Offences related to army, air force and navy.
² Offences related to government servants.
² Offences related to elections.
² Request for orders concerning protection from domestic violence.
² Providing false evidence and offences against public justice.
In addition to that this court can also work on offences mentioned in
parliamentary Acts.
Eg.- Forest Ordinance, Excise Ordinance, Cosmetics, Devices and Drugs
Act, Food Act, Road Development Authority Act, as well as Motor Traffic Act.
14 For free distribution
Activity 1.3
² Observe a judicial institute in your area and prepare a report about its
functions.
Duty of the chiefs who exercise the law
Three main offices or roles that occupy the top most place on judicial affairs
and law of Sri Lanka can be identified. They are, the Minister of Justice, Chief
justice, and Attorney General. Now let us study their duties.
Minister of Justice
Minister of justice is entitled to get the bills related to the field of judiciary
from the parliament as well as to answer the questions of the parliament on judicial
affairs. He can also discharge the functions assigned by the constitution and by the
other acts, as well as to appoint Justice of Peace.
Chief Justice
He is the chief of the Supreme Court which is the apex court of Sri Lanka. He
is in charge of inspecting registrar of Supreme Court giving commands and control.
He is also the chairman of Judicial Service Commission. He makes rules related
to judiciary and three more judges assist this course. Few areas on which rules are
made are as follows.
² Rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals, appeals, to be entertained or
dismissed.
² Rules as to the granting of bail.
² Affairs related to the profession of lawyers (Admission, Enrolment,
suspension and Removal of Attorneys - at - Law)
² Affairs related to panel of jurors.
² Amending, changing rules and introducing new rules related to judiciary.
² Proceedings of Fiscals and the process of such courts.
For free distribution 15
Attorney General
Present post of Attorney General has been established according to the
ordinance no 01 of 1883. Attorney General who is the chief legal officer of Sri Lanka
is appointed by His excellency the President. He is the chief of the department of
Attorney General. Some of his functions are as follows.
1. Power to grant pardon on the most obvious evidence and other matters in
the cases that can be exclusively heard by the high court.
2. Giving approval for filing some cases in criminal courts.
3. Powers to summon some officers of government departments to his office
and giving necessary advice to them.
4. Power to take legal actions against government servants who treat the public
unfairly and those who are reluctant to mete out justice as well as those
who ignore their duties.
5. Before a case is filed against a minister, secretary, or a government officer,
it should be informed to Attorney General.
6. Power to confer the responsibility of Attorney General to his representatives.
7. Power to release convicts when enough evidences are not available.
8. Taking the responsibility on the constitutionality of bills submitted to
parliament.
Functions of Attorney General are as follows.
Providing H.E. the president
with the recommendations to
exercise capital punishment
against a convict
Providing necessary legal
advice for the cases related to
the government
Providing necessary
legal advice for the bills
submitted to parliament
Appearing on behalf of cases
related to government and
government institutions
Participating as a party in the
cases heard by supreme court
Filling all legal affairs done
by the government or those
against the government
Diagram 1.7 Functions of attorney general
16 For free distribution
There are few officers who are helpful in fulfilling powers and function of
Attorney General.
Attorney
General
Solicitor General
Additional Solicitor General
Deputy Solicitor General
Senior advocates of the government
Government advocates
Diagram 1.8 Officers who assist the Attorney General
Activity 1.4
² Evaluate the functions of Minister of Justice, Chief Justice and
Attorney General.
Alternative methods of resolving disputes
Several alternative methods have been established in Sri Lanka before
going to a judiciary to resolve a problem. It provides an opportunity for the people
to save their money, time and labour while getting an immediate solution which is
agreeable to both parties. Some of those methods are as follows.
Arbitration
Problems arised between employers and employees are harmful for the
respective institution as well as for the existence of the country. Working on solving
those disputes within a legal framework is known as the arbitration Industrial
settlement Act of 1950 can be used for that.
For free distribution 17
Settlement can be classified into two on the basis of the way it takes place.
Voluntary Arbitration Compulsory Arbitration
Arbitration
Resolving problem by the
parties after informing the
commissioner of labour affairs
through a arbitrator name by
them.
It is known as the settlement made
by force. Settling dispute through a
person appointed by the Minister of
Justice using his powers.
Diagram 1.9 – Methods of arbitration
An individual who discuss with both parties related to a dispute and come
to a resolution is called an arbitrator. One or more arbitrators may involve in the
arbitration procedure.
In the process of arbitration, a report on dispute is given to the arbitrator
by the commissioner of labour. The arbitrator contents an investigation of dispute
that should be finished within a reasonable time frame. If there are other parties
related to the dispute, they should also participate in it. The decision is given after
obtaining the ideas of both parties. The decision should be published in Gazette by
the commissioner of labour to ensure the legality. The parties can also reject the
decision.
Ombudsman
The post of Ombudsman or the administrative officer of parliamentary affairs
has been established in order to safeguard the fundamental rights and other rights
of citizens from being violated by the executive or administrative affairs.
This post was introduced by the constitution of 1978. He performs two
main duties.
I. Preventing the violation of fundamental rights of all citizens.
II. Protecting citizens from all administrative injustice.
18 For free distribution
He is appointed by H.E. the President. He can hold the post as long as he
is of good health and conduct. The salary is paid through consolidated fund and
it cannot be diminished during his term of the office. He can be removed by
H.E. the President through a parliament resolution. After 1994, any citizen can
complain directly to the Ombudsman.
Activity 1.5
² Prepare a report after collecting information about the functions of a
conciliation board in your area. Mention merits and demerits of it too.
Human Rights Commission
Every individual has a right to safeguard his human rights. It will be discussed
at length in the chapter on Human Rights and duties. A person can complain to
the Human Right Commission about violations of human rights and get a relief.
This commission has been established through the Act number 2 of 1996. It is
comprises of 20 members and they are appointed by H.E.the president.
Main functions of the commission are as follows
1. Making people aware of human rights
2. Giving advice to the government on fundamental rights
3. Hearing the complaints on violation of human rights and giving solutions.
4. Being watchful about executive and administrative affairs so that Human
rights are safeguarded.
5. Giving advice to the government to make national laws and policies according
to international principles on human rights.
6. Giving advice to the government about the need to enter into international
treaties relevant to human rights.
Powers of Human Rights Commission are as follows
² Inspecting the violation of Human Rights and interfering in judicial affairs
² Establishing sub committees relevant to human rights in principle level
For free distribution 19
² Making recommendations after examining those who are imprisoned through
a court order or in any other ways
² Conducting programmes to promote human rights
² Providing a reasonable compensation for those whose human rights are violated
Councelling and conciliation are two other methods followed which have
already been discussed in citizenship education book of grade 10 under the topics
of methods of conflict resolutions, (page 102 – 105) Thus, they are not discussed
here.
Activity 1.6
² Write the advantages that individuals, institutions and society in common
get by the use of alternative ways to solve disputes.
Rule of Law
Rule of law means ruling a country on the basis of the supremacy of the
law. Every individual and institution is expected to work according to the law.
Constitutional law is the most supreme law in our country and everyone is obliged
to work according to it.
G. Martial has also mentioned about three characteristics that influence the
rule of law.
Features that
influence the concept
of rule of law
Enforcement of law through an
independent judiciary with equity
and equality
Everyone being subject to the law
Availability of an impartial,
specific, reasonable, just, common
system of law
Diagram 1.10 – Features that influence the rule of law
20 For free distribution
According to the above qualities some of the features seen in a society where
the rule of law has been established are as follows.
² Availability of an independent judicial system
² Awareness of every citizen about law
² Not treating ignorance of the law as an excuse
² Dispensing law impartially without any delay
² Not exercising law on the basis of status, profession, wealth or any other matters
² Treating everyone equally before the law
² Not exerting influence on judges in their decision making
When this concept is exercised, the extreme conditions that can badly affect
individuals can be minimized so that a fair and just society can be established.
Independence of the Judiciary
Fig 1.3 Athena
Judiciary occupies a significant place in
modern society. The reason is the priority given for
judiciary for safeguarding rights and freedom as well
as to ensure justice and equity.
When the judiciary is independent and
impartial, a confidence is built up in individuals
about judiciary. People tend to live while respecting
law under such conditions. Constitution of 1978 has
provided many provisions to safeguard independence
of judiciary.
The use of goddess Athena as the symbol of
judicial affairs, indicates the fact that it functions with an equity, impartiality in a
moderate manner. Some of the provisions introduced to safeguard independence of
judiciary are as follows.
For free distribution 21
² Appointment of judges
Judges are appointed by H.E. the President under the recommendation of
the constitutional council. The age of retirement is mentioned and they cannot be
removed before it. They can hold the post as long as they are in good health.
² Removal of judges
There has been a special procedure proposed in the constitution. This
procedure also expects to ensure job security. So that they can give Judgements
independently and impartially.
² Salaries of judges
Salaries are paid to the judges through a consolidated fund. It is also a step
to safeguard independence of judiciary. Accordingly, the budget has no reference to
the allocations related to judges. Salaries of the judges of Supreme Court and Court
of Appeal are deducted by the parliament.
² Accepting other positions
According to the constitution it is strictly prohibited for the judges of
Supreme Court or Court of Appeal to accept any other paid or non paid post
without approval of the H.E. President. They should not be employed in any other
profession.
This also prevails as a provision to ensure the independence of judiciary.
² Restriction of unnecessary involvements and control.
To ensure independent judiciary, infaluencing judicial affairs was determined
to be a punishable offence. Judges can function without being subject to any other
influences due to this provision.
² Establishing judicial service commission
Establishment of judicial service commission is also a step to safeguard
the independence of judiciary. Chief Justice is the President of this commission
while two other judges are members. Members are appointed by H.E. the
President for a period of five years.
22 For free distribution
Activity 1.7
² Do you think judiciary should be independent? State 5 reasons supporting it.
Importance of dispensing law impartially without any delay
Taking much time for a trial can lead to dilute the confidence of citizens
about the law and judiciary. Drawbacks or delay of dispensing justice can make
an injustice for those who are affected.
Some of the demerits of unnecessary delay and not dispensing justice
impartially are as follows.
² Decline of the confidence of individuals on judicial system and the law
² Rise of anarchy instead of the law
² Increase of crime and corruptions in the country
² Deterioration of equity and equality of law in the country.
² Tendency to use illegal methods to achieve justice
² Spending much money and time to fulfill the justice
² Decline of people's respect to judiciary and the law
Independence of judiciary and dispensing justice efficiently with equity are
essential to minimize above situations and to achieve the concept of good governance
in the country.
It is also a prime duty of the citizens to work while respecting the law and
judicial system of the country peacefully. Every citizen should abide by law since
it is a tool that prefects peaceful and justifiable societies.
Activity 1.8
² Discuss the importance of living as a law abiding citizen.